Astro 5.3 blog (#1399)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-530.mdx

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={6}
  {
    adapter: node({
      mode: "standalone",
    }),
    experimental: {
      session: true,
    },
  }
```

If you are already using the session feature, you will need to update your configuration for the new syntax with this breaking change.

The `experimental.session` option is now a boolean flag that you can set `true` and enjoy a default session storage driver with a supported adapter, no further configuration needed!

Session configuration itself has moved to a top-level `session` key. This allows you to configure a non-default driver, as well as other options such as a `base` prefix or expiration `ttl`.

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={9,11-13} del={6-8}
  {
    adapter: node({
      mode: "standalone",
    }),
    experimental: {
        session: {
            driver: "upstash",
        },
        session: true,
    },
    session: {
        driver: "upstash",
    },
  }
```

For more details and examples, see the [experimental session docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/).

## More control over Netlify bundling

> When Astro builds your site to deploy to a serverless platform like Netlify or Vercel, it needs to bundle all the files and dependencies needed to run your site. The Netlify and Vercel adapters use [the same library for this](https://github.com/vercel/nft), which is usually good at working out what's needed. It doesn't always get this right though: sometimes it misses a file that you need, particularly if it's a static file that you are loading with filesystem functions. Other times it includes files that you don't need, which can slow down your build and increase your bundle size, particularly if it's something like a large binary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Astro builds your site to deploy to a serverless platform like Netlify or Vercel, it needs to bundle all the files and dependencies needed to run your site. The Netlify and Vercel adapters use [the same library for this](https://github.com/vercel/nft), which is usually good at working out what's needed.

It doesn't always get this right though: sometimes it misses a file that you need, particularly if it's a static file that you are loading with filesystem functions. Other times it includes files that you don't need, which can slow down your build and increase your bundle size, particularly if it's something like a large binary.
```
Just splitting up into two paragraphs, but otherwise great!

> To deal with this, the Vercel adapter already has `excludeFiles` and `includeFiles` options that allow you to specify files that should be excluded or included in the bundle. With this release these options are available in the Netlify adapter as well. Both options accept an array of paths or globs.

Reviewer 2: a small nit!
```suggestion
To deal with this, the Vercel adapter already has `excludeFiles` and `includeFiles` options that allow you to specify files that should be excluded or included in the bundle. With this release, these options are available in the Netlify adapter as well. Both options accept an array of paths or globs.
```

Now, thanks to an awesome community contribution from [MatthewLymer](https://github.com/MatthewLymer) from [Fora](https://fora.com), Astro will only render components asynchronously if... (a)wait for it... they actually contain an async function call.

In benchmarks, this has resulted in a significant speedup for rendering synchronous components. This benefits both on-demand and static builds, though the biggest improvements are seen in SSR response times. This even helps pages that use async functions, because most components on the page will still be synchronous.

The exact amount of the improvement will depend on the individual sites. Complex pages with many components will see the biggest improvements, while pages that use slower external APIs at request time may be unchanged. In our testing, SSR responses are generally 1.5-2x faster unless the page is querying external APIs. Some examples:

- For the 5300-page [Astro docs site](https://docs.astro.build), it **cut static build times by 10-15%.**

> - In the Platformic SSR benchmark, which generates a page with over 3000 components, requests are **4x faster**.

Reviewer 3: Do we have a link to the benchmark? (not necessarily the results, just the source)
```suggestion
- In the Platformic SSR benchmark, which generates a page with over 3000 components, requests are **4x faster**.
```

Reviewer: Great catch on the name, Reuben! I'd be tempted to link the name, too.

Reviewer 4: I'm happy with adding the link to the benchmark suite, can you add it @TheOtterlord ?

The exact amount of the improvement will depend on the individual sites. Complex pages with many components will see the biggest improvements, while pages that use slower external APIs at request time may be unchanged. In our testing, SSR responses are generally 1.5-2x faster unless the page is querying external APIs. Some examples:

- For the 5300-page [Astro docs site](https://docs.astro.build), it **cut static build times by 10-15%.** 
- In the Platformic SSR benchmark, which generates a page with over 3000 components, requests are **4x faster**.

> You don't need to do anything to benefit from this improvement: just sit back and enjoy the faster rendering times.

Reviewer: Lovely!

## Automatic session storage setup

> Astro 5.1 introduced the experimental [session storage API](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/), which allows developers to easily manage user sessions on the server. The feature supports dozens of different backend storage drivers, powered by [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io). Previously you would need to configure the session storage driver in your `astro.config.mjs`, but now Astro will automatically set up the session storage for you when using a supported adapter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro 5.1 introduced the experimental [session storage API](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/experimental-flags/sessions/), which allows developers to easily manage user sessions on the server. The feature supports dozens of different backend storage drivers, powered by [unstorage](https://unstorage.unjs.io).

Previously you needed to configure a session storage driver in your `astro.config.mjs`, but now Astro will automatically set up the session storage for you when using a supported adapter.
```
I'm sensing a theme...

> Currently, these supported adapters include `@astrojs/node`, which uses the filesystem for storage, and `@astrojs/netlify`, which uses Netlify Blobs. We hope to add support for more adapters in the near future, where the hosting platforms include a storage API. In all cases, you can still manually configure your own session storage driver if you prefer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're starting with support for the `@astrojs/node` adapter, which uses the filesystem for storage, and `@astrojs/netlify`, which uses Netlify Blobs. We hope to add default driver support for more adapters in the near future, where the hosting platforms include a storage API. In all cases, you can still manually configure your own session storage driver if a default one does not exist or you prefer to use a different one.
```
Maybe a little more active wording to jump start the paragraph?

> To enable session storage, set the `experimental.session` flag in your `astro.config.mjs`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't experimented with the session storage API yet, you can enable this feature by setting the `experimental.session` flag  to `true` in your `astro.config.mjs`:
```
Making a clearer split between who is adding this fresh and who needs to update a config

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={6}
  {
    adapter: node({
      mode: "standalone",
    }),
    experimental: {
      session: true,
    },
  }
```

> If you are already using the session feature, note that the syntax for the config has changed. The `experimental.session` option is now a boolean flag, and the actual session config has moved to a top-level `session` key. This allows you to enable the feature without needing to configure the session storage driver when on a platform that configures it for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are already using the session feature, you will need to update your configuration for the new syntax with this breaking change.

The `experimental.session` option is now a boolean flag that you can set `true` and enjoy a default session storage driver with a supported adapter, no further configuration needed!

Session configuration itself has moved to a top-level `session` key. This allows you to configure a non-default driver, as well as other options such as a `base` prefix or expiration `ttl`.
```
Just calling a bit more attention to the breaking change and splitting it out for visibility. Something like this? (If paragraphs feel heavy, you could also do bullet points instead maybe? (Haven't played around to see what that looks like):

```
this breaking change:

- The `experimental.session`...
- Session configuration itself...
```

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={9,11-13} del={6-8}
  {
    adapter: node({
      mode: "standalone",
    }),
    experimental: {
        session: {
            driver: "upstash",
        },
        session: true,
    },
    session: {
        driver: "upstash",
    },
  }
```

> 

Reviewer: Some kind of "for full details and examples, please see docs" sentence here?

> ## Bug fixes

Reviewer: Up to you if you want a blurb about the Netlify adapter updates here. Since this change adds a feature that the Vercel adapter already had, it might be nice to mention the improvement here!
